_notes/an non-existant note.md, before:

---
title: The Template for Notes
tags: ux programming sleep cognition
notetype: 
authors:
year: 2020
doi:
journal:
authors:
year:
link:
journal:

---

Sensitivity to brightness can occur due to number of issues ranging from corneal issues like infections and abrasions, to dry eye, to concussions, to allergies; eg: Keratoconus, Uveitis, Keratitis, Preeclampsia. Google claims in its [[android developer guide that dark themes can improve visibility for people who have low vision and are sensititive to brightness::https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/look-and-feel/darktheme]], but people I have spoken to on this topic (n≈20) had normal vision and normal range of sensitivity to light. 

Even people with mild eye issues[[Jason Harrison, UBC - People with astigmatism (approximately 50% of the population) find it harder to read white text on black than black text on white.::lsn]] 

seem to benefit from light theme than dark theme in most cases. And to top it all, even the researches that focus on the legibility

[[Bauer, D., & Cavonius, C., R. (1980). *Improving the legibility of visual display units through contrast reversal.* <br/>**See Below for more**.::rsn]] 

and aesthetics claim that dark on light is almost always better than dark on light. Every article I have read and referenced below vouch for dark on light, which I find to be true too at least in most occasions.

How can what is relatively bad for legibility in most ocassions, bad in terms of expressibility of authorial aesthetics be a wide-spread preference? My hypothesis is this is primarily due to cognitive exhaustion like sleep deprivation, burn-out, stress etc (Extrapolating from n=1), which due to implicity conformity and [[preference falsification::https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preference_falsification]] has become a normative social element. My experience has been that when I have had a bad last night sleep or stress due to office, I invariably am looking for less polarity, otherwise the dark on white seems more appealing to me both aesthetics wise and legibility wise. An extension of these could be that cognitive stress elevate the ocular stress like accomodative/refractive/convergence stress leading up to this, but I contest dark mode being the wide-spread personal/subjective preference.

---

## References

Warren Buffet. (Unknown). *[[The Inner Scorecard::https://fs.blog/2016/08/the-inner-scorecard/]]*

{:.boxit .serif .medium}
> “He wants to know what the best is so he can be superior to everything at once by seeing that the best isn’t perfect”.

Commit message:

Switched to BBEdit and added some things to the note template

_notes/an non-existant note.md, after:

---
title: The Template for Notes
tags: ux programming sleep cognition
notetype: 
authors:
year: 2020
doi:
journal:
authors:
year:
link:
journal:

---

This is the text of a note. It can have links to the outside world with double square brackets link text colon url [[like this::https://www.benhammersley.com]], or to internal pages with just the double brackets.

It can have left hand side footnotes [Like this, which is just like linking to another thing, only using lsn as the URL::lsn]]. And the same works for the right hand side too [Like this, which is just like linking to another thing, only using rsn as the URL::rsn]]


You can also put links and html inside the notes. [[Like this. *Which is fun.* <br/>**See Below for more**.::rsn]] 

Links to Wikipedia and some other sites have a superscript added to it. [[preference falsification::https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preference_falsification]] has become a normative social element. 

---

## References

Reference authoer *[[The Inner Scorecard::https://fs.blog/2016/08/the-inner-scorecard/]]*

{:.boxit .serif .medium}
> “He wants to know what the best is so he can be superior to everything at once by seeing that the best isn’t perfect”.
